Add documentation for the auto model updates (#25947)
apache/beam: website/www/site/content/en/documentation/ml/side-input-updates.md

---

> title: "Auto Model Updates in RunInference Transforms using SideInputs"

Author: @riteshghorse Would you mind taking a look since this is a new feature and fresh set of eyes could reveal confusing content?

---

> title: "Auto Model Updates in RunInference Transforms using SideInputs"

Reviewer: Maybe change this to:

Auto-update ML models

I think this primarily appears in the window/tab in the browser, so shorter might be better. We usually have this match the H1 title.

Author: should I change the H1 title as well?

Reviewer: I think the H1 is fine as-is. It's just too long to use in this field.

> title: "Auto Model Updates in RunInference Transforms using SideInputs"

Author: ```suggestion
title: "Auto Update ML models using WatchFilePattern"
```

---
<!--
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

> # Use WatchFilePattern as side input to auto-update ML models in RunInference

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Use WatchFilePattern to auto-update ML models in RunInference
```

I think this is a clearer title for the non-beam user. The "how" (side inputs) is sufficiently explained below, so the title can just focus on the behavior the user is trying to achieve.

> The pipeline in this example uses a [RunInference](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/transforms/python/elementwise/runinference/) `PTransform` with a [side input](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/programming-guide/#side-inputs) `PCollection` that emits `ModelMetadata` to run inferences on images using TensorFlow models.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The pipeline in this example uses a [RunInference](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/transforms/python/elementwise/runinference/) `PTransform` to run inference on images using TensorFlow models. It uses a [side input](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/programming-guide/#side-inputs) `PCollection` that emits `ModelMetadata` to update the model.
```

Suggestion for clarity - the current form makes it sound like the `ModelMetadata` (or maybe the side input) is the thing running inference

> Using side inputs, you can update your model (which is passed in the `ModelHandler`) in real-time, even while the Beam pipeline is still running. This can be done either by leveraging one of Beam's provided patterns, such as the `WatchFilePattern`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using side inputs, you can update your model (which is passed in a `ModelHandler` configuration object) in real-time, even while the Beam pipeline is still running. This can be done either by leveraging one of Beam's provided patterns, such as the `WatchFilePattern`,
```

This mirrors how we talk about `ModelHandlers` elsewhere in our docs

> or by configuring a custom side input PCollection that defines the logic for the model update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or by configuring a custom side input `PCollection` that defines the logic for the model update.
```

> **More about `side inputs` can be found at https://beam.apache.org/documentation/programming-guide/#side-inputs.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about side inputs, see the [Side inputs](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/programming-guide/#side-inputs) section in the Apache Beam Programming Guide.
```

> This example uses [WatchFilePattern](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/current/apache_beam.ml.inference.utils.html#apache_beam.ml.inference.utils.WatchFilePattern) as a side input. `WatchFilePattern` is used to watch for the file updates matching the `file_pattern`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example uses [`WatchFilePattern`](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/current/apache_beam.ml.inference.utils.html#apache_beam.ml.inference.utils.WatchFilePattern) as a side input. `WatchFilePattern` is used to watch for the file updates matching the `file_pattern`
```

> based on timestamps. It emits the latest [ModelMetadata](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/transforms/python/elementwise/runinference/), which is used in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
based on timestamps. It emits the latest [`ModelMetadata`](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/transforms/python/elementwise/runinference/), which is used in
```

> the RunInference `PTransform` to auto update the ML model without stopping the Beam pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the RunInference `PTransform` to automatically update the ML model without stopping the Beam pipeline.
```

> ### Setting up source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Set up the source
```

To read the image names, use a Pub/Sub topic as the source.
 * The Pub/Sub topic emits a `UTF-8` encoded model path that is used to read and preprocess images to run the inference.

> ### Models for image segmentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Models for image segmentation
```

>  * The Pub/Sub topic emits a `UTF-8` encoded model path that is used to read and preprocess images to run the inference.

Reviewer: I don't think this needs to be a bullet point. These two sentences could just be one paragraph.

Author: Done

For the purpose of this example, use TensorFlow models saved in [HDF5](https://www.tensorflow.org/tutorials/keras/save_and_load#hdf5_format) format.

> ### Pre-processing image for inference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pre-process images for inference
```

> The PubSub topic emits an image path. We need to read and preprocess the image to use it for RunInference. `read_image` function is used to read the image for inference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Pub/Sub topic emits an image path. We need to read and preprocess the image to use it for RunInference. The `read_image` function is used to read the image for inference.
```

```python
import io
from PIL import Image
from apache_beam.io.filesystems import FileSystems
import numpy
import tensorflow as tf

def read_image(image_file_name):
  with FileSystems().open(image_file_name, 'r') as file:
    data = Image.open(io.BytesIO(file.read())).convert('RGB')
  img = data.resize((224, 224))
  img = numpy.array(img) / 255.0
  img_tensor = tf.cast(tf.convert_to_tensor(img[...]), dtype=tf.float32)
  return img_tensor
```

Now, let's jump into the pipeline code.

**Pipeline steps**:

> 1. Get the image names from the PubSub topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Get the image names from the Pub/Sub topic.
```

> 2. Read and pre-process the images using `read_image` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Read and pre-process the images using the `read_image` function.
```

> 3. Pass the images to the `RunInference` PTransform. RunInference takes `model_handler` and `model_metadata_pcoll` as input parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Pass the images to the RunInference `PTransform`. RunInference takes `model_handler` and `model_metadata_pcoll` as input parameters.
```

> For the [model_handler](https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/07f52a478174f8733c7efedb7189955142faa5fa/sdks/python/apache_beam/ml/inference/base.py#L308), we will be using [TFModelHandlerTensor](https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/186973b110d82838fb8e5ba27f0225a67c336591/sdks/python/apache_beam/ml/inference/tensorflow_inference.py#L184).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the [`model_handler`](https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/07f52a478174f8733c7efedb7189955142faa5fa/sdks/python/apache_beam/ml/inference/base.py#L308), we use [TFModelHandlerTensor](https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/186973b110d82838fb8e5ba27f0225a67c336591/sdks/python/apache_beam/ml/inference/tensorflow_inference.py#L184).
```

```python
from apache_beam.ml.inference.tensorflow_inference import TFModelHandlerTensor
# initialize TFModelHandlerTensor with a .h5 model saved in a directory accessible by the pipeline.
tf_model_handler = TFModelHandlerTensor(model_uri='gs://<your-bucket>/<model_path.h5>')
```

> The `model_metadata_pcoll` is a [side input](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/programming-guide/#side-inputs) PCollection to the RunInference PTransform. This is used to update the models in the `model_handler` without needing to stop the beam pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `model_metadata_pcoll` is a [side input](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/programming-guide/#side-inputs) `PCollection` to the RunInference `PTransform`. This side input is used to update the models in the `model_handler` without needing to stop the beam pipeline.
```

> The `model_metadata_pcoll` is a [side input](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/programming-guide/#side-inputs) `PCollection` to the RunInference `PTransform`. This side input is used to update the models in the `model_handler` without needing to stop the beam pipeline.

Reviewer 2: @rszper this following section has a lot of code blocks which collectively make it kinda hard to read IMO (http://apache-beam-website-pull-requests.storage.googleapis.com/25947/documentation/ml/side-input-updates/index.html), but I don't know of a great way around it - any ideas on how we could make this section a little cleaner looking/easier to read? The content itself is correct

We will use `WatchFilePattern` as side input to watch a glob pattern matching `.h5` files.

> `model_metadata_pcoll` expects a `PCollection[ModelMetadata]` compatible with [AsSingleton](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/2.4.0/apache_beam.pvalue.html#apache_beam.pvalue.AsSingleton) view. Since the pipeline uses `WatchFilePattern` as side input, it will take care of windowing and wrapping the output into `ModelMetadata`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`model_metadata_pcoll` expects a `PCollection[ModelMetadata]` compatible with [`AsSingleton`](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/2.4.0/apache_beam.pvalue.html#apache_beam.pvalue.AsSingleton) view. Because the pipeline uses `WatchFilePattern` as side input, it will take care of windowing and wrapping the output into `ModelMetadata`.
```

> `model_metadata_pcoll` expects a `PCollection[ModelMetadata]` compatible with [`AsSingleton`](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/2.4.0/apache_beam.pvalue.html#apache_beam.pvalue.AsSingleton) view. Because the pipeline uses `WatchFilePattern` as side input, it will take care of windowing and wrapping the output into `ModelMetadata`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`model_metadata_pcoll` expects a `PCollection` of ModelMetadata compatible with [AsSingleton](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/2.4.0/apache_beam.pvalue.html#apache_beam.pvalue.AsSingleton) view. Because the pipeline uses `WatchFilePattern` as side input, it will take care of windowing and wrapping the output into `ModelMetadata`.
```

I think this reads/renders more cleanly (code block links don't render well, see this line in http://apache-beam-website-pull-requests.storage.googleapis.com/25947/documentation/ml/side-input-updates/index.html)

> `model_metadata_pcoll` expects a `PCollection` of ModelMetadata compatible with [AsSingleton](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/2.4.0/apache_beam.pvalue.html#apache_beam.pvalue.AsSingleton) view. Because the pipeline uses `WatchFilePattern` as side input, it will take care of windowing and wrapping the output into `ModelMetadata`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`model_metadata_pcoll` expects a `PCollection` of ModelMetadata compatible with the [AsSingleton](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/2.4.0/apache_beam.pvalue.html#apache_beam.pvalue.AsSingleton) class. Because the pipeline uses `WatchFilePattern` as side input, it will take care of windowing and wrapping the output into `ModelMetadata`.
```

I'm not sure if this update is accurate, so please verify. I just find "compatible with AsSingleton view" confusing, so I'm trying to make what we mean here clearer.

Author: I removed the word `view`. We call (or may be I call it) the PCollection passed to the side input as `view` because in RunInference, it is viewed as a Singleton.

> `model_metadata_pcoll` expects a `PCollection` of ModelMetadata compatible with [AsSingleton](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/2.4.0/apache_beam.pvalue.html#apache_beam.pvalue.AsSingleton) view. Because the pipeline uses `WatchFilePattern` as side input, it will take care of windowing and wrapping the output into `ModelMetadata`.

Author: ```suggestion
`model_metadata_pcoll` expects a `PCollection` of ModelMetadata compatible with [AsSingleton](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/2.4.0/apache_beam.pvalue.html#apache_beam.pvalue.AsSingleton). Because the pipeline uses `WatchFilePattern` as side input, it will take care of windowing and wrapping the output into `ModelMetadata`.
```

> Once the pipeline starts processing data and when you see some outputs emitted from the `RunInference` PTransform, upload a `.h5` `TensorFlow` model that matches the `file_pattern` to the Google Cloud Storage bucket. RunInference will update the `model_uri` of `TFModelHandlerTensor` using `WatchFilePattern` as side input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the pipeline starts processing data and when you see some outputs emitted from the RunInference `PTransform`, upload a `.h5` `TensorFlow` model that matches the `file_pattern` to the Google Cloud Storage bucket. RunInference will update the `model_uri` of `TFModelHandlerTensor` using `WatchFilePattern` as a side input.
```

> **Note**: Side input update frequency is non-deterministic and can have longer interval between updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: Side input update frequency is non-deterministic and can have longer intervals between updates.
```

```python
import apache_beam as beam
from apache_beam.ml.inference.utils import WatchFilePattern
from apache_beam.ml.inference.base import RunInference
with beam.Pipeline() as pipeline:

  file_pattern = 'gs://<your-bucket>/*.h5'
  pubsub_topic = '<topic_emitting_image_names>'

  side_input_pcoll = (
    pipeline
    | "FilePatternUpdates" >> WatchFilePattern(file_pattern=file_pattern))

  images_pcoll = (
    pipeline
    | "ReadFromPubSub" >> beam.io.ReadFromPubSub(topic=pubsub_topic)
    | "DecodeBytes" >> beam.Map(lambda x: x.decode('utf-8'))
    | "PreProcessImage" >> beam.Map(read_image)
  )

  inference_pcoll = (
    images_pcoll
    | "RunInference" >> RunInference(
    model_handler=tf_model_handler,
    model_metadata_pcoll=side_input_pcoll))

```

> ### Post-process `PredictionResult` object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Post-process the `PredictionResult` object
```

> Once the inference is done, RunInference outputs `PredictionResult` object that contains `example`, `inference` and, `model_id`. Here, the `model_id` is used to identify which model is used for running the inference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the inference is complete, RunInference outputs a `PredictionResult` object that contains `example`, `inference`, and `model_id`. Here, the `model_id` is used to identify which model is used for running the inference.
```

> When the inference is complete, RunInference outputs a `PredictionResult` object that contains `example`, `inference`, and `model_id`. Here, the `model_id` is used to identify which model is used for running the inference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the inference is complete, RunInference outputs a `PredictionResult` object that contains `example`, `inference`, and `model_id` fields. The `model_id` is used to identify which model is used for running the inference.
```

```python
from apache_beam.ml.inference.base import PredictionResult

class PostProcessor(beam.DoFn):
  """
  Process the PredictionResult to get the predicted label and model id used for inference.
  """
  def process(self, element: PredictionResult) -> typing.Iterable[str]:
    predicted_class = numpy.argmax(element.inference[0], axis=-1)
    labels_path = tf.keras.utils.get_file(
        'ImageNetLabels.txt',
        'https://storage.googleapis.com/download.tensorflow.org/data/ImageNetLabels.txt'
    )
    imagenet_labels = numpy.array(open(labels_path).read().splitlines())
    predicted_class_name = imagenet_labels[predicted_class]
    return predicted_class_name.title(), element.model_id

post_processor_pcoll = (inference_pcoll | "PostProcessor" >> PostProcessor())
```

## Run the pipeline
```python
result = pipeline.run().wait_until_finish()
```

> **Note**: `model_name` of the `ModelMetaData` object will be attached as prefix to the [metrics](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/ml/runinference-metrics/) calculated by the RunInference PTransform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: The `model_name` of the `ModelMetaData` object will be attached as prefix to the [metrics](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/ml/runinference-metrics/) calculated by the RunInference `PTransform`.
```

## Final remarks

> Use this example as a pattern when using side inputs with the RunInference `PTransform` to auto-update the models without stopping the pipeline. You can see a similar example for PyTorch on [GitHub](https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/master/sdks/python/apache_beam/examples/inference/pytorch_image_classification_with_side_inputs.py).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use this example as a pattern when using side inputs with the RunInference `PTransform` to auto-update the models without stopping the pipeline. You can see a similar example for PyTorch on [GitHub](https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/master/sdks/python/apache_beam/examples/inference/pytorch_image_classification_with_side_inputs.py).
```

Nit: consistency of style with the next sentence.

This example uses `WatchFilePattern` as a side input. `WatchFilePattern` is used to watch for the file updates matching the `file_pattern`
based on timestamps. It emits the latest [ModelMetadata](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/transforms/python/elementwise/runinference/), which is used in
the RunInference `PTransform` to dynamically update the model without stopping the Beam pipeline.

**Note**: Slowly-updating side input patterns are non-deterministic.

### Setting up source

To read the image names, use a Pub/Sub topic as the source. 
 * The Pub/Sub topic emits a `UTF-8` encoded model path that is used to read and preprocess images to run the inference.

## Models for image segmentation

For the purpose of this example, use models saved in [HDF5](https://www.tensorflow.org/tutorials/keras/save_and_load#hdf5_format) format. Initially, pass a model to the Tensorflow ModelHandler for predictions until there is an update via side input. 

> After a while, upload a model that matches the `file_pattern` to the GCS bucket. The bucket path will be used a glob pattern and is passed to the `WatchFilePattern`.

Reviewer: GCS bucket should be Google Cloud Storage bucket.

Also, the second sentence has a grammatical error. I think it should be:

The bucket path will be used as a glob pattern and is passed to the `WatchFilePattern`.

Author: Thanks.  I changed it already. Working on a final draft now. I will ping you for another review soon. Thanks!!

limitations under the License.
-->

> # Use Slowly-Updating Side Input Pattern to Auto Update Models in RunInference Transform

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Use slowly-updating side input patterns to auto-update models
```

> The pipeline in this example uses [RunInference](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/transforms/python/elementwise/runinference/) PTransform with a `side input` PCollection that emits `ModelMetadata` to run inferences on images using open source Tensorflow models trained on `imagenet`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pipeline in this example uses a [RunInference](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/transforms/python/elementwise/runinference/) `PTransform` with a side input `PCollection` that emits `ModelMetadata` to run inferences on images using open source Tensorflow models trained on `imagenet`.
```

> In this example, we will use `WatchFilePattern` as a side input. `WatchFilePattern` is used to watch for the file updates matching the `file_pattern`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example uses `WatchFilePattern` as a side input. `WatchFilePattern` is used to watch for the file updates matching the `file_pattern`
```

> based on timestamps and emits the latest [ModelMetadata](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/transforms/python/elementwise/runinference/), which is used in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
based on timestamps. It emits the latest [ModelMetadata](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/transforms/python/elementwise/runinference/), which is used in
```

> `RunInference` PTransform for the dynamic auto model updates without the need for stopping the beam pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the RunInference `PTransform` to dynamically update the model without stopping the Beam pipeline.
```

> **Note**: Slowly-updating side input pattern is non-deterministic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: Slowly-updating side input patterns are non-deterministic.
```

> ### Setting up source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Set up the source
```

> We will use PubSub topic as a source to read the image names. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To read the image names, use a Pub/Sub topic as the source. 
```

>  * PubSub topic emits a `UTF-8` encoded model path that will be used read and preprocess images for running the inference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * The Pub/Sub topic emits a `UTF-8` encoded model path that is used to read and preprocess images to run the inference.
```

> ### Models for image segmentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Models for image segmentation
```

> We will use `resnet_v2_101` for initial predictions. After a while, upload a model that matches the `file_pattern` to the GCS bucket. The bucket path will be used a glob pattern and is passed to the WatchFilePattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For initial predictions, use `resnet_v2_101`. Upload a model that matches the `file_pattern` to the Google Cloud Storage bucket. The bucket path is used as a glob pattern and is passed to `WatchFilePattern`.
```

> Once there is an update, the RunInference PTransform will update the `model_uri` to use the latest model/file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the update, the RunInference `PTransform` updates the `model_uri` to use the latest model and file.
```

> ### ModelHandler used for Predictions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## ModelHandler for predictions
```

    predicted_class_name = imagenet_labels[predicted_class]
    return predicted_class_name.title(), element.model_id

post_processor_pcoll = (inference_pcoll | "PostProcessor" >> PostProcessor())
```

> ### Run the pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Run the pipeline
```

```python
result = pipeline.run().wait_until_finish()
```

> Once the pipeline is run with initial settings, upload a model matching the `file_pattern` to GCS bucket. After some time, you will see that your pipeline starts to use the updated model instead of the initial model. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you run the pipeline with the initial settings, upload a model matching the `file_pattern` to the Google Cloud Storage bucket. Your pipeline will use the updated model instead of the initial model. 
```

> **Note**: `model_name` of the `ModelMetaData` object will be attached as prefix to the [metrics](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/ml/runinference-metrics/) calculated by the RunInference PTransform 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: The `model_name` of the `ModelMetaData` object is attached as prefix to the [metrics](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/ml/runinference-metrics/) calculated by the RunInference `PTransform`. 
```

## Final remarks

> Use this example as a pattern on how to use side inputs with RunInference PTransform to auto update the models without the need to stop the pipeline. A similar example for PyTorch can be found on [GitHub](https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/master/sdks/python/apache_beam/examples/inference/pytorch_image_classification_with_side_inputs.py).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this example as a pattern when using side inputs with the RunInference `PTransform` to auto-update the models without stopping the pipeline. You can see a similar example for PyTorch on [GitHub](https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/master/sdks/python/apache_beam/examples/inference/pytorch_image_classification_with_side_inputs.py).
```
